## Myeloid progenitor dysregulation fuels immunosuppressive macrophages in tumours

Samarth Hegde 1,2 , Bruno Giotti 1,3,13 , Brian Y . Soong 1,2,13 , Laszlo Halasz 1,2 , Jessica Le Berichel 1,2 , Maximilian M. Schaefer 1,2 , Benoit Kloeckner 4 , Raphaël Mattiuz 1,2 , Matthew D. Park 1,2 , Assaf Magen 1 , Adam Marks 1,2,3,5 , Meriem Belabed 1,2 , Pauline Hamon 1,2 , Theodore Chin 1,2 , Leanna Troncoso 1,2 , Juliana J. Lee 6 , Kaili Fan 7 , Dughan Ahimovic 8,9 , Michael J. Bale 8,9 , Kai Nie 1,2,10 , Grace Chung 1,2,10 , Darwin D'souza 1,2,10 , Krista Angeliadis 1,2,10 , Seunghee Kim-Schulze 1,2,10 , Raja M. Flores 5,11,12 , Andrew J. Kaufman 5,11,12 , Florent Ginhoux 4 , Jason D. Buenrostro 7 , Steven Z. Josefowicz 8,9 , Alexander M. Tsankov 1,3,5 , Thomas U. Marron 1,2,3,5,11,12 , Sai Ma 3,5 , Brian D. Brown 1,2,3,5 &amp; Miriam Merad 1,2,5,10 ✉

Monocyte-derived macrophages (mo-macs) often drive immunosuppression in the tumour microenvironment (TME) 1 and tumour-enhanced myelopoiesis in the bone marrow fuels these populations 2 . Here we performed paired transcriptome and chromatin accessibility analysis over the continuum of myeloid progenitors, circulating monocytes and tumour-infiltrating mo-macs in mice and in patients with lung cancer to identify myeloid progenitor programs that fuel pro-tumorigenic mo-macs. We show that lung tumours prime accessibility for Nfe2l2 (NRF2) in bone marrow myeloid progenitors as a cytoprotective response to oxidative stress, enhancing myelopoiesis while dampening interferon response and promoting immunosuppression. NRF2 activity is amplified during monocyte differentiation into mo-macs in the TME to regulate stress and drive immunosuppressive phenotype. NRF2 genetic deletion and pharmacological inhibition significantly reduced the survival and immunosuppression of mo-macs in the TME, restoring natural killer and T cell anti-tumour immunity and enhancing checkpoint blockade efficacy. Our findings identify a targetable epigenetic node of myeloid progenitor dysregulation that sustains immunoregulatory mo-macs in the lung TME and highlight the potential of early interventions to reprogram macrophage fate for improved immunotherapy outcomes.

A main focus in cancer immunotherapy has been reprogramming monocyte-derived macrophages (mo-macs) in the microenvironment of solid tumours to reverse immunosuppression and unleash T cell and/ or natural killer cell responses 3 . Although this TME-centric approach has considerable merit, it fails to tackle the 'wellspring' of bone marrow (BM) myeloid progenitors seeding monocytes and mo-macs in the TME through tumour-driven myelopoiesis 2,4 . Tumour-induced myelopoiesis has been observed across several cancers 5-8 , but molecular mechanisms remain elusive. As our view of systemic tumour-host crosstalk expands, it becomes important to understand whether tumoural cues alter the molecular state of myeloid progenitors in BM, priming genes that ultimately affect anti-tumour responses. Understanding the mechanics of mo-mac replenishment and plasticity of mo-mac development during cancer inflammation is key to breaking the vicious cycle of tumour myelopoiesis, and developing more efficacious myeloid-targeting therapies.

Here we sought to identify epigenetic changes that prime myeloid progenitors in lung tumour-bearing hosts, probe their contribution towards pro-tumorigenic mo-macs in the TME, and harness this knowledge to redirect TME mo-mac fate towards an anti-tumour phenotype.

## NSCLC influences chromatin state of BM progenitors

To characterize the impact of lung adenocarcinoma growth on myelopoiesis, we profiled progenitors and myeloid lineages in BM of naive and Kras LSL-G12D/+ ;Trp53 fl/fl (KP) tumour-bearing mice modelling non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), at early (day 7), middle (day 15) and advanced (day 21) time points. We observed a marked increase in long-term haematopoietic stem cells (LT-HSC), multipotent common myeloid progenitors (CMP), granulocytic-monocytic progenitors (GMP) and committed monocyte progenitor (cMoP) by

1 Marc and Jennifer Lipschultz Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 2 Department of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 3 Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 4 Institut Gustave Roussy, INSERM U1015, Villejuif, France. 5 The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 6 Department of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 7 Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 8 Immunology and Microbial Pathogenesis Program, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, New York, NY, USA. 9 Laboratory of Epigenetics and Immunity, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.  10 The Human Immune Monitoring Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 11 Division of Hematology/Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 12 Center for Thoracic Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 13 These authors contributed equally: Bruno Giotti, Brian Y. Soong. ✉ e-mail: miriam.merad@mssm.edu

flow cytometry in BM of advanced KP tumour-bearing mice (Fig. 1a) alongside an increase in more mature myeloid populations (Extended Data Figs. 1a and 2a). BM progenitors from late-stage tumour-bearing mice formed markedly more granulocytic-monocytic colonies than erythroid colonies and proliferated more than their tumour-naive counterparts (Extended Data Fig. 1b,c). In addition, we observed an increased mobilization of Ly6C hi monocytes and Ly6G hi neutrophils in circulation tracking with tumour burden (Extended Data Figs. 1d naive mice; ranked by false discovery rate (FDR). Dot colour indicates known biological pathways. Dashed lines indicate mean difference cut-off for visualization of most-deviated factors. f , g , H3K4me3 CUT&amp;RUN signal clustering ( f ) and relative DORC scores for exemplar genes ( g ) in KP tumourassociated GMP and monocytes relative to naive. Units in f are normalized counts per million. h , Frequency of HSC, multipotent progenitors (MPP) and GMP in blood of patients with NSCLC ( n = 12) and healthy donors (HD, n = 3). Pooled from three experiments. i , Normalized UCell-computed scores for oxidative stress response signature in indicated cells from patients with NSCLC ( n = 3) and HD ( n = 2). j , Normalized scores for cisTopic region 5 in HSC, lymphoidmyeloid primed multipotent progenitors (LMPP) and monocytes from blood of patients with NSCLC ( n = 3) compared with HD ( n = 2). Per-cell distribution, pooled per group ( c , i , j ). Statistics computed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Fisher's LSD test ( a ), one-way ANOVA with Dunnett's multiple comparison ( b ), unpaired two-tailed Student's t-test ( d , h ) or hypergeometric test with multiple correction ( c , i , j ). D, day; FC, fold change.

and 2b). We also observed an expansion of GMP-derived CD157 + Ly6C hi neutrophil-like monocytes in the BM and peripheral blood of late-stage tumour-bearing mice (Fig. 1b), previously described to expand in emergency conditions and engender oxidative burst-associated degranulation gene programs 9,10 . We observed a similar expansion of GMPs, cMoPs and CD157 + Ly6C hi monocytes in the Kras LSL-G12D/+ ;Trp53 fl/fl genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM) (Extended Data Fig. 1e) and ruled out any contribution of bone metastases (Extended Data Fig. 2c).

Given that such myeloid expansion is driven by malignancy, we probed how molecular programs are transcriptionally and epigenetically rewired in myeloid progenitors in response to peripheral tumour cues. Experimentally, we used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to interrogate myeloid progenitor lineages broadly sorted from the BM of age-matched naive and advanced tumour-bearing mice (Extended Data Fig. 2d). We identified distinct granulocytic (granulocytic progenitor, pre-neutrophil, immature neutrophil) and monocytic (cMoP, Ly6C hi monocyte, Ly6C low monocyte) lineages (Extended Data Fig. 1f and Supplementary Table 2). We focused on monocytic lineage progenitors (GMP and cMoP) because they are the main source of suppressive mo-macs in tumours 11 . Differentially upregulated genes in tumour-educated GMPs and cMoPs were associated with biological processes such as 'response to reactive oxygen species (ROS)', 'hypoxia response', 'regulation of apoptosis' and 'metabolic regulation of superoxide generation', which was supported in other datasets of tumour-driven myelopoiesis 12,13 (Extended Data Fig. 1g,h). Tumour-associated BM myeloid progenitors and Ly6C hi monocytes also had higher gene signature scores for oxidative stress response and ER stress response (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1) while exhibiting increased cellular ROS burden, lipid peroxidation and mitochondrial oxidative stress as measured by flow cytometry (Fig. 1d).

Using scRNA-seq profiles of myeloid cells with paired small-cell ATAC sequencing (scATAC-seq) data, we then correlated gene programs in each myeloid cell state to chromatin accessibility (Extended Data Fig. 1i) and focused on transcription factors (TF) driving downstream gene programs. Lineage-determining TF motifs enriched in GMP marker regions included GATA2, TAL1 and LYL1 (ref. 14), whereas cMoPs and monocyte marker regions were enriched in IRF4 and SPIB 15 (Extended Data Fig. 1j). We then sought to identify TF motifs enriched in differentially accessible regions of tumour-associated cell states. In line with our transcriptional results, tumour-associated GMPs and cMoPs had increased motif accessibility for oxidative stress-responsive TFs such as NFE2L2, BACH1, FOSL2, ATF4, ATF5, NFIL3, STAT3 and XBP1 (ref. 16), AP-1 factors such as JUND, JUN and FOS, and granulocytic fate regulators CEBPB and CEBPA 17 (Fig. 1e), when compared with naive counterparts. These observations were further supported by our analysis of histone CUT&amp;RUN data showing H3K4me3 signal (enriched proximal to promoter regions) was gained in tumour-associated myeloid progenitors in genomic regions associated with oxidative stress handling, detoxification, chromatin remodelling and proliferation (Fig. 1f and Extended Data Fig. 1k). Enhancer-associated H3K4me1 and H3K27ac signal augmented in tumour-associated GMPs was associated with pathways involved in cellular detoxification, immunoregulation and anti-apoptotic or pro-survival pathways (Extended Data Fig. 1l). Domains of regulatory chromatin (DORC) scores calculated on H3K4me3 signal-gene association highlighted genes involved in inflammation regulation (for example, S100a8 , S100a9 , Hif1a , Chil3 , Lcn2 and Prtn3 ), metabolic adaptation under oxidative stress (for example, Hk3 , Eif5a , Pkm , Gpi1 , Gsr and Aldh2 ) and mitogen-induced survival (for example, Anxa3 , Tnfrsf1a and Serpinb1a ) activated in KP-experienced GMPs (Fig. 1g and Methods). On the other hand, we observed a reduction of type I or III interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene expression in tumour-associated BM myeloid progenitors, supporting a dampened inflammatory state 18,19 distal to the TME (Fig. 1c). The reduced chromatin accessibility for several IFN pathway TFs including IRF3, IRF7, IRF5 and STAT2 (Fig. 1e), lower H3K4me3-associated DORC scores at IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) loci such as Ifi203 , Oasl1 and Isg15 (Fig. 1g) and lower H3K4me1-associated and H3K27ac-associated DORC scores complemented by higher H3K27me3 repressive histone mark at gene loci such as Ifitm3 , Ms4a4c , Mx1 and Gbp4 in tumoural BM myeloid progenitors (Extended Data Fig. 1m) further supported our transcriptomic findings of IFN hyposensitivity. These results collectively suggested that tumour-associated myelopoiesis drives priming of pathways in BM GMPs involved in the ROS stress response 20 , mitochondria-ER metabolic adaptations 21 and IFN hypo-responsiveness to limit exhaustion 22 . We identified certain binding motifs for TFs such as Nfe2l2 to be enriched in promoter-proximal activating histone marks of tumoural myeloid progenitors, unlike TFs such as Gata2 , Mesp1 , Glis2 and Tcf3 that are enriched at more distal H3K4me1 and H3K27ac enhancer-associated signal (Extended Data Fig. 1n).

Subsequently, we quantified mobilized progenitor populations in the blood of patients with early-stage NSCLC and found that HSCs, multipotent progenitors (MPPs) and GMPs were elevated in peripheral blood from patients with early-stage NSCLC when compared with healthy donors (Fig. 1h and Extended Data Fig. 2e). We next conducted a 10x Multiome (RNA + ATAC) assay on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with NSCLC, to interrogate molecular changes. Mirroring our findings in mice, CD14 + monocytes from peripheral blood of patients with early NSCLC had increased oxidative stress response signature scores (Fig. 1i and Extended Data Fig. 1o) and accessible chromatin topics enriched in these patients were associated with 'MAPK signalling activation', 'metabolic processes', 'response to ROS' and 'response to oxidative stress' (Fig. 1j and Extended Data Fig. 1p). In support, genes differentially expressed in monocytes from patients with NSCLC were downstream of TF regulators such as NFE2L2, STAT3, PPARG and MYC (Extended Data Fig. 1q). Thus, cancer-associated inflammation provokes demand-adapted mobilization of myeloid-biased progenitors associated with oxidative stress-responsive epigenomic remodelling.

## Tumour-induced myelopoiesis fuels TME mo-macs

To measure whether imprinting of stress-responsive programs in BM myeloid progenitors upon sensing systemic tumour cues influence mo-mac states in the TME, we adoptively transferred GMPs from either tumour-bearing mice or naive mice into a tumour-bearing congenic host (Extended Data Fig. 2f). We found mo-macs derived from tumour-primed GMPs to be more immunoregulatory in the TME, characterized by increased differentiation into GPNMB + CD9 + TREM2 hi mo-macs 23 expressing higher PD-L1, increased ARG1 + mo-macs 24 and decreased frequency of CD86 + MHCII +  immunostimulatory mo-macs (Fig. 2a and Extended Data Fig. 3a-c). In addition, we differentiated BM-derived macrophage (BMDM) ex vivo in the presence of tumour conditioning (CM) either early or later during the differentiation. Early exposure to tumour inflammatory cues significantly enhanced mo-mac suppressive phenotype compared with late exposure (Extended Data Fig. 3d). Transient incubation of BM progenitors with KP CM also cued a more immunoregulatory phenotype in progeny macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 3e). These results collectively suggest that exposure of myeloid progenitors to tumour cues affected their ultimate trajectory in the TME.

Using paired scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq analysis of myeloid cells isolated from naive and tumour-bearing lungs (Extended Data Fig. 2g), we identified discrete inflammatory Ly6C hi monocytes, patrolling Ly6C low monocytes, resident tissue alveolar macrophages, interstitial macrophages and mo-mac subsets such as ARG1 hi mo-macs and TREM2 hi mo-macs (Extended Data Fig. 4a). Using gene-gene correlation, we identified a module of genes implicated in anti-apoptotic cytoprotection, glycolytic metabolic shift and regulation of oxidative stress that was highly enriched in tumour-infiltrating ARG1 hi mo-macs and TREM2 hi mo-macs (Extended Data Fig. 4b, Supplementary Table 2 and Methods), regulated by TFs such as STAT3 , NFE2L2 , HIF1A , KLF4 , SPI1 and CEBPB . We captured a similar diversity of tumour-infiltrating myeloid cells in the scATAC-seq data through independent clustering of chromatin accessibility features (Extended Data Fig. 4c), which aligned with cell-type-specific enrichment of lineage-determining TF motifs (Extended Data Fig. 4d). TFs for oxidative stress response, including Nfe2l2 , Fosl2 and Bach1 , were specifically enriched in tumour-dominant ARG1 hi and TREM2 hi mo-macs. Phenotypically, Ly6C hi monocytes infiltrating KP tumours exhibited a higher oxidative stress burden (Extended

Data Fig. 3f) and intratumoural TREM2 hi mo-macs had relatively higher amounts of cytosolic ROS when compared with immunostimulatory mo-macs (Extended Data Fig. 3g). In light of our findings in BM myeloid progenitors, these results suggested that oxidative stress-induced cytoprotective chromatin changes initiated in tumour-educated myeloid progenitors are maintained in tumoural mo-macs.

We simultaneously used paired single-cell chromatin accessibility and gene expression profiling to analyse tumour-infiltrating immune cells isolated from 14 human NSCLC lesions (Supplementary Table 3). On the basis of marker gene-based filtering in our 10x Multiome dataset from 5 patients, we isolated 4,177 myeloid cells and classified them according to their nuclear RNA-seq profiles and by weighted gene correlation network analysis (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Tumour-infiltrating myeloid cells included CD14 + monocyte clusters, a transitional mo-mac state that exhibits monocytic features and macrophage markers such as MRC1 , CD68 and C1QA ; SPP1 hi mo-macs 25 characterized by SPP1 , FBP1 and IL4I1 ; and TREM2 hi mo-macs 26 characterized by GPNMB , CD9 , TREM2 and PPARG (Extended Data Fig. 4f and modules in Supplementary Table 4). We integrated the cellular identity from Multiome samples with 24,346 scATAC-seq-captured myeloid cells from 9 patients (Extended Data

Fig. 4g). In close agreement with our mouse analyses, we observed motifs for TFs such as NFE2L2 , FOSL2 , JUN and BACH1 to be enriched in marker peaks of tumour-infiltrating activated CD14 + monocytes, mo-mac\_transition and TREM2 hi mo-macs (Extended Data Fig. 4h).

Subsequently, we prioritized TF regulators with sustained cell-typespecific activity in TME-infiltrating immunosuppressive mo-macs. Putative TF regulators in our mouse dataset included Spi1 , Mafb and Cebpb , as well as NF-κB or Rel family members and AP-1 family members associated with response to inflammation and growth factors 27 (Extended Data Fig. 4i). Strikingly, we again observed a nexus of stress-responsive TFs, principally Nfe2l2 , Bach1 , Fosl2 , Mafk and Mafg . Concurrent analyses in our human NSCLC dataset of TME monocytes and mo-macs indicated very similar candidate regulators such as NFKB1 , REL , SPIB and CEBPB but also oxidative stress response and integrated stress response regulators NFE2L2 , BACH1 , MAFF , FOSL2 and ATF4 (Fig. 2b). Downstream pathways conserved across mouse and human TME mo-macs included 'heme signalling', 'cytoprotection by HMOX1', 'response to ER stress' and 'mitochondrial biogenesis' (Extended Data Fig. 4j) and ranking on the basis of correlation to gene expression prioritized NFKB1 , REL , CEBPB , CEBPG and NFE2L2 (Fig. 2c).

## NRF2 signalling dampens IFN response in the TME

We were especially interested in NRF2 because of its role in driving antioxidant gene batteries, promoting resistance to lipid-associated ferroptosis and opposing NF-κB pro-inflammatory cascades 28,29 . NRF2 can also directly influence pro-inflammatory signals by suppressing type I IFN pathway genes and limiting inflammasome activation 30-33 . In the lung, we observed relative TF motif deviation for NRF2 and aggregate score for NRF2 downstream gene activation to be highest in immunoregulatory ARG1 hi and TREM2 hi mo-macs that accumulate in late-stage tumours 34 (Fig. 2d). We did not rely on Nfe2l2 gene expression alone, because NRF2 is regulated post-transcriptionally and post-translationally. As a proxy for activation of NRF2 programs in vivo, we assayed the amounts of nuclear NRF2 and intracellular heme oxygenase (HO-1, encoded by Hmox1 ) 35 . TREM2 hi mo-macs had increased amounts of NRF2 and HO-1 compared with CD86 + MHCII + mo-macs in KP tumours (Extended Data Fig. 3h), and mo-macs in KP GEMM also had increased amounts of NRF2 (Extended Data Fig. 5a). Similarly, in human NSCLC, NRF2 TF motif deviation was highest in immunosuppressive TREM2 hi mo-macs and recently infiltrated monocytes (mo-mac\_transition), with concomitantly high NRF2 downstream gene activation (Fig. 2e). Furthermore, we found the NRF2 activation score to be highest in tumour-associated TREM2 hi mo-macs across two independent scRNA-seq datasets 36,37 (Extended Data Fig. 3i and Methods).

Given the persistent NRF2 pathway activation in TME immunosuppressive mo-macs, we next explored when NRF2 was activated during GMP differentiation to monocytes and mo-macs. We observed increased NRF2 activation and HO-1 induction in mo-macs that differentiate in vivo from adoptively transferred tumour-experienced BM GMPs, and myeloid progenitors exposed to early transient tumour conditioning (Extended Data Fig. 3j,k). GMPs isolated from KP tumour-bearing mice had increased H3K4me3 promoter-proximal signal at known NRF2 oxidative stress response genes such as Gclm , Alas1 , Gsr , Prtn3 and Txnrd1 (Extended Data Fig. 3l), but also key immunosuppressive gene loci such as Cebpb , Ptgs1 (ref. 38), Inhba 39 , Lcn2 (ref. 40) and S100a8 (ref. 41) (Fig. 2f), suggesting imprinting of immunoregulatory programs early in differentiation. Crucially, although we observed tumour-educated BM GMPs and monocytes had increased NRF2 motif accessibility compared with their tumour-free counterparts, this was not matched by activation of downstream gene programs (Extended Data Fig. 5b). Given the downregulation of the IFN-stimulated response in tumour-experienced BM myeloid cells, we next tested the temporal relationship of IFN responsiveness with NRF2 activation. For this, we implanted lung tumours in Mx1 GFP IFN-sensitive response element reporter mice 42 . Here tumour-associated monocytes across tissue compartments and tumoural mo-macs had consistently lower GFP expression than their naive counterparts, indicating lower IFN responsiveness (Extended Data Fig. 5c). Strikingly, there was a stepwise increase in Mx1 GFP as monocytes infiltrated the tumour, followed by waning in TME mo-macs concomitant with NRF2 activation (Extended Data Fig. 5c,d). Several ISGs and antigen-presentation-associated gene loci are potentially regulated by NRF2 and partner TFs at distal enhancer loci, as evident from reduced H3K27ac CUT&amp;RUN marks in KP-experienced GMPs at loci such as Mx1 , Ifitm1 , Slamf7 and H2-Ab1 (Extended Data Fig. 5e). These results collectively suggested that exposure of BM myeloid progenitors to tumour cues primes NRF2 response loci and certain immunosuppressive gene loci, which promotes a more immunoregulatory fate for mo-macs in the TME with a dampened type I or III IFN response.

## Tumour cues activate NRF2 in BM progenitors

Taking a candidate approach to identify cues that activate NRF2, we found protein factors to be the dominant trigger in tumour CM (Extended Data Fig. 6a,b). Specifically, factors such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and interleukin 6 were enriched in BM sera, blood sera and tumour CM (Extended Data Fig. 6d-f). GM-CSF and interleukin 6 mimicked the impact of tumour CM on myelopoiesis, resulting in NRF2 activation, increased HO-1 expression and increased proliferation (Extended Data Fig. 6g,h). The myelopoietic effects of KP CM were ameliorated by incubating progenitors with anti-GM-CSF and anti-interleukin 6 neutralizing antibodies, associated with a reduction in oxidative stress burden (Extended Data Fig. 6i,j). Although there was a reduction in myeloid expansion and HO-1 expression upon incubating progenitors with KP CM in the presence of ML385-an inhibitor of Nfe2l2 DNA binding and transcriptional activity 43 (Extended Data Fig. 6k)there was an increase in oxidative burden (Extended Data Fig. 6l) suggestive of stress response uncoupling. We found that stress-responsive p38 MAPK signalling was induced in KP CM-experienced progenitors (Extended Data Fig. 6m) but was not affected by ML385 (Extended Data Fig. 6n); this suggested NRF2 pathway activation to be downstream of stress-responsive signal transduction from mitogenic cues such as GM-CSF and interleukin 6. Incubating progenitors with GM-CSF and interleukin 6 in the presence of p38 MAPK inhibitor ameliorated myelopoietic expansion as well as HO-1 expression in conjunction with reducing cellular ROS burden (Extended Data Fig. 6o,p). Although we do not exclude other signals in the TME such as heme 44 , our results indicate that NRF2 activation in BM due to tumour mitogen-induced oxidative stress enables progenitors to continue expanding to meet inflammatory demand (Extended Data Fig. 6q).

## NRF2 regulates mo-mac function in the TME

Having established the role of NRF2 in BM myeloid expansion, we interrogated the functional consequence of NRF2 in tumour-associated myeloid cell survival and immunosuppression. Exposing BMDMs to tumour CM during the last 24 h of culture (to mimic polarization in the TME) resulted in immunosuppressive gene activation, cytoprotection and IFN response suppression (Extended Data Fig. 7a). When we cultured BMDMs from NRF2 constitutive knockout mice ( Nfe2l2 TKO ) or wild-type counterparts in the presence of KP CM, we found that tumour-conditioned Nfe2l2 TKO BMDMs had lower relative activation of Arg1 , Retnla and Chil3 , while concomitantly expressing higher amounts of the ISGs Mx1 and Nos2 (Fig. 3a). Adding ML385 at day 6 resulted in a similar phenotype (Extended Data Fig. 7b). Remarkably, tumour-educated Nfe2l2 TKO BMDMs exhibited increased ROS burden, lipid peroxidation and mitochondrial stress, and increased sensitivity to cell death (Extended Data Fig. 7c,d). This susceptibility for cell death under redox crisis was specific to tumour condition, because Nfe2l2 TKO BMDMs did not exhibit increased cell death at steady state (Extended Data Fig. 7e). Viable tumour-educated Nfe2l2 TKO BMDMs had reduced expression of HO-1, ARG1 and PD-L1 with increased expression of MHCII, CD86 and CD40 (Fig. 3b), indicating a phenotypic shift towards immunogenicity and antigen presentation.

Next, we generated conditional knockout mice, wherein NRF2 is floxed by Cre recombinase under the Ms4a3 promoter ( Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 ) restricted to GMPs 45 , resulting in decreased NRF2 activity. Myelopoiesis, differentiation and monocyte function in these mice were unaltered at the steady state (Extended Data Fig. 7f-i). We adoptively transferred GMPs from CD45.2 Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 or Nfe2l2 fl/fl control BM into congenic CD45.1 hosts bearing KP tumours, and found that GMPs from Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice differentiated into more immunostimulatory CD86 + MHCII + mo-macs and strikingly fewer TREM2 hi mo-macs in the lung TME, with the TREM2 hi mo-macs having decreased PD-L1 (Fig. 3c). GMPs derived from KP-experienced mice treated with quassinoid NRF2 inhibitor Brusatol 46 , when similarly transferred into congenic tumour-bearing mice, differentiated into more immunostimulatory mo-macs (Fig. 3d). Remarkably, GMPs from tumour-naive mice administered antioxidant N -acetyl cysteine (NAC) differentiated into mo-macs with increased

immunosuppressive phenotype (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 7j). Thus, manipulating ROS burden and NRF2 activation in BM GMPs influenced subsequent mo-mac phenotype in the TME.

## NRF2 enhances immunoregulatory myelopoiesis

Considering that peripheral tumours can promote NRF2 priming in BM myeloid progenitors, we interrogated how loss of NRF2 signalling functionally affects myelopoiesis. To do so, we first administered NRF2 inhibitor ML385 in KP tumour-bearing LSL-TdTomato Ms4a3CreERT2 reporter mice and pulsed with one dose of tamoxifen to trace the fate of recently emigrated GMP-derived cells in the TME. NRF2 inhibition resulted in a reduction of TdTomato-labelled intratumoural mo-macs and neutrophils 8 days post-tamoxifen, with a significant reduction in the frequency of TREM2 hi mo-macs (Fig. 3e). Consequently, we implanted KP tumours orthotopically in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 and Nfe2l2 fl/fl mice. Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice had a significant reduction in KP burden and greater overall survival (Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 8a). Similar results were obtained in the LLC1 lung cancer model and the B16-F10 model of melanoma lung metastases (Extended Data Fig. 8b). We also generated transgenic mice, wherein the Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1) locus was floxed under Ms4a3Cre ( Keap1 ∆Ms4a3 ) resulting in GMP-restricted loss of KEAP1, a component of the Cullin 3-based E3 ubiquitin ligase complex controlling the stability of NRF2, leading to sustained NRF2 activity and an increase in NRF2 downstream programs. KP tumours were significantly larger in Keap1 ∆Ms4a3 mice when compared with

littermates (Extended Data Fig. 8c). We next assessed myelopoiesis in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice. Although NRF2 deletion did not affect steady-state myelopoiesis (Extended Data Fig. 7f,g), tumour-bearing Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice had significant contraction of BM CMP, GMP and cMoP numbers (Fig. 4b). Reduced NRF2 in tumoural mo-macs of Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice was associated with a reduction in the number of PD-L1-expressing TREM2 hi mo-macs in the TME and a compensatory increase in CD86 + MHCII + immunogenic mo-macs (Fig. 4c,d). Notably, TREM2 hi mo-macs in the TME of Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice were more susceptible to cell death (Extended Data Fig. 8d), providing rationale for the phenotypic shift in the TME. The mo-mac distribution in Keap1 ∆Ms4a3 mice was tumour-promoting, with more abundant TREM2 hi mo-macs in the TME expressing PD-L1 (Extended Data Fig. 8e).

To measure the cell-intrinsic effect of NRF2 activation on myelopoiesis independent of tumour burden differences, we created mixed-BM chimeras with 1:1 reconstitution of CD45.2 Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 and CD45.1 Nfe2l2 WT mice (Extended Data Fig. 8f). We observed decreased expansion of Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 donor-derived GMPs in BM and lower mobilization of Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 CD157 + Ly6C hi monocytes in peripheral blood (Extended Data Fig. 8g). Consequently in the lung, TREM2 hi mo-macs of Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 origin were also relatively less abundant, whereas CD86 + MHCII + mo-macs were increased (Extended Data Fig. 8h). Integrated scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq on the myeloid progenitor lineages in tumour-bearing Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice and control counterparts (Extended Data Fig. 8i) showed the most differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially accessible regions (DARs) to be in GMPs and

monocytic lineages (Extended Data Fig. 8j-l). The GMP, cMoP and mature monocyte clusters in BM of Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice had reduced TF motif accessibility for Nfe2l2 and Bach1 , Stat3 , Myc , Myb , Fosl2 and Atf3

that drive important facets of myeloid differentiation, proliferation and survival 47-49 (Fig. 4e and Extended Data Fig. 8m). Type I or III IFN response regulators such as Irf3 , Irf5 and Irf9 were enriched in DARs of

## Article

Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mature Ly6C hi monocytes, matched by reduced accessibility for Hnf1a , Etv3 and Etv6 (ref. 50) (Extended Data Fig. 8m). Downstream of BM progenitors, molecular programs in lung-infiltrating myeloid cells were significantly altered in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice (Extended Data Fig. 8n,o). NRF2 activation scores were decreased in Ly6C hi monocytes from Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice, with a concomitant upshift in IFN-responsive gene scores (Extended Data Fig. 8p). Specifically, there was relative enrichment of ISGs ( Stat1 , Rsad2 , Ifit2 , Isg20 , Ifit3b ) and antigen presentation genes ( H2-Ab1 , H2-Aa , Mef2c ) in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 TME-infiltrative monocytes and mo-macs, with a decrease in sensing pathways ( Ier3 , Tlr4 , Cd38 and C3ar1 ), immunoregulatory genes ( Chil3 , Vcan , S100a8 , Ngp , Lcn2 , Arg1 , Ptgs1 and Prtn3 ) and NRF2-associated cytoprotective genes ( Gpx3 , Gclm , Tfec and Ednrb ) (Fig. 4f and Extended Data Fig. 8q).

To disentangle how NRF2 affects local reprogramming in the TME from how it influences replenishment through myelopoiesis, we leveraged the tamoxifen-inducible strategy to generate Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3CreERT2 mice and conditionally ablate NRF2 signalling in myeloid precursors before or after tumour exposure. Tamoxifen administration from the time of KP tumour implantation (early) in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3CreERT2 mice resulted in a greater reduction in tumour when compared with tamoxifen administration at later stages of progression (Fig. 4g). Early attenuation of NRF2 signalling in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3CreERT2 mice was associated with a decrease in BM GMPs, cMoPs and CD157 + Ly6C hi monocytes (Fig. 4h), reduced mobilization of CD157 + Ly6C hi monocytes (Fig. 4i), but insignificant changes to neutrophil mobilization and tumoural infiltration (Extended Data Fig. 9a,b). Early attenuation of NRF2 signalling, as evidenced by reduced nuclear NRF2 in TME mo-macs, was associated with accumulation of more immunostimulatory mo-macs (Fig. 4j,k). Reduced myeloid NRF2 signalling was associated with significant infiltration of tumoricidal IFNγ + natural killer cells into lung tumours (Extended Data Fig. 9c-e). Effector CD8 + T cells were also more abundant in the tumours of Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice (Extended Data Fig. 9f,g). Depletion of monocytes and mo-macs in KP tumour-bearing NRF2-proficient mice resulted in a clear reduction in tumour burden, signifying the importance of mo-macs in KP progression, but such treatment in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice saw no additive impact, suggesting NRF2 activation in mo-macs is crucial to orchestrating immunosuppression (Extended Data Fig. 9h). Furthermore, depletion of natural killer cells in tumour-bearing Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 mice resulted in greater tumour burden, highlighting the mode of immunoregulation in this model to be predominantly by means of natural killer cell exclusion and suppression 34 (Extended Data Fig. 9i).

## Targeting myeloid NRF2 potentiates immunotherapy

Given the impact of NRF2 activation on mo-macs curtailing anti-tumour natural killer cell and T cell surveillance, we interrogated whether myeloid NRF2 influences immunotherapy response. In three independent scRNA-seq datasets of immunotherapy or chemotherapy response comparing baseline with post-therapy tissue, tumour-infiltrating mo-macs enriched in non-responders (Extended Data Fig. 10a-c and Methods), as well as circulating CD14 + monocytes in non-responders with stable disease (Extended Data Fig. 10d) had DEGs regulated by TFs such as PPARG , TP63 , SMAD4 and NFE2L2 . Spurred on by our observations, we tested whether pharmacological inhibition of NRF2 can enhance response to checkpoint blockade. We administered NRF2 inhibitor Brusatol with or without anti-PD-1 therapy starting at day 9 post-KP tumour implant. Combination treatment significantly reduced tumour burden (Fig. 4l), affected myelopoiesis as evidenced by the reduction of CMPs, GMPs and cMoPs (Fig. 4m), and reduced mobilization of CD157 + Ly6C hi monocytes (Fig. 4n). These systemic changes were associated with a decrease in the abundance of mo-macs, specific decrease in PD-L1 + TREM2 hi mo-macs and concomitant increase in CD86 + MHCII + mo-macs (Fig. 4o). Combination of Brusatol and anti-PD-1 prolonged survival outcomes beyond benefit derived from anti-PD-1 monotherapy (Extended Data Fig. 10e). A similar dosing regimen using ML385 in conjunction with anti-PD-1 had similarly improved outcomes (Extended Data Fig. 10f). We found the efficacy of combination therapy relied on targeting of myeloid NRF2, because administration of Brusatol and anti-PD-1 in Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3Cre mice had no additive impact on anti-tumour immunity (Extended Data Fig. 10g). Anti-tumour immunity was associated with a substantial influx of natural killer cells with increased expression of CD69 and tumoricidal IFNγ (Extended Data Fig. 10h), alongside effector CD8 + T cells lacking exhaustion marks, and producing IFNγ and tumour necrosis factor (Extended Data Fig. 10i).

## Discussion

We demonstrate that peripheral tumour cues induce maladaptive myelopoiesis, in part, by altering the oxidative stress response in BM progenitors through NRF2 priming. These findings are indicative of hormetic oxidative stress during steady-state haematopoiesis becoming dysfunctional during chronic inflammation and malignancy 51 . We further find NRF2-driven programs to be progressively activated in tumour-infiltrating mo-macs, promoting pro-survival, detoxification and immunosuppressive machinery. Our work aligns with evidence of neutrophil reprogramming in the TME 52-54 , and posits a shared oxidative stress-mediated cytoprotective mechanism across myeloid cells engendering immunosuppression. Our data extend this model, demonstrating that maladaptation of NRF2 signalling is initiated early in tumour-educated BM myeloid progenitors as a 'first hit' and reinforced along the mo-mac lineage in the TME. These findings also imply the establishment of epigenetic memory in HSCs and myeloid progenitors 55 wrought by tumour inflammation.

Our data highlight the potential of targeting oxidative stress regulators such as NRF2 in influencing monocyte fate and restoring mo-mac immunogenicity. Targeting NRF2 signalling in myeloid progenitors and TME myeloid cells can have the added benefit of exploiting NRF2-KEAP1 vulnerability in many cancers 56 . Therapeutics exploiting modalities such as TF-targeted molecular glue degraders and PROTACs 57 could provide specific and durable rewiring of monocytic differentiation in the TME. NRF2 is part of a constellation of stress response regulators governing metabolism and proteostasis 58-60 ; future studies will help decipher how these factors interplay with NRF2 in priming cytoprotective and immunoregulatory gene loci in myeloid progenitors to orchestrate TME mo-mac fate.

## Online content

Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09493-y.

Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

## Mice

C57BL/6 mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories or Jackson Laboratory. CD45.1 congenic C57BL/6 mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (C57BL/6J-Ptprc em6Lutzy /J RRID:IMSR\_JAX:033076). Ms4a3 Cre mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (C57BL/6JMs4a3 em2(cre)Fgnx /J RRID:IMSR\_JAX:036382) and Ms4a3 CreERT2 mice were received from F. Ginhoux 45 . Nfe2l2 fl/fl floxed mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (C57BL/6-Nfe2l2 tm1.1Sred /SbisJ RRID:IMSR\_ JAX:025433). NRF2 constitutive knockout ( Nfe2l2 TKO )  mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (B6.129×1-Nfe2l2 tm1Ywk /J RRID:IMSR\_ JAX:017009). Keap1 fl/fl floxed mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (B6(Cg)-Keap1tm1.1Sbis/J RRID:IMSR\_JAX:037075). Mx1 GFP mice were received from A. Garcia-Sastre (Mount Sinai), and subsequently purchased from Jackson Laboratory (B6.Cg-Mx1 tm1.1Agsa /J RRID:IMSR\_ JAX:033219). Kras LSL-G12D/+ ;Trp53 fl/fl mice used for autochthonous model of NSCLC (GEMM) were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (B6.129-Kras tm4Tyj Trp53 tm1Brn /J RRID:IMSR\_JAX:032435). Focal tumour were induced by means of intratracheal inhalation of 2.5× 10 × 10 8 pfu adenoviral vector with Surfactant Protein C promoter driving Cre recombinase (Ad5mSPC-Cre, courtesy of A. Berns) at 12 weeks of age. KP tumour implantations and associated experiments were conducted in mice between 10 and 14 weeks of age. Both male and female mice were used, and we observed no significant differences between sexes in any experiment. Where applicable, littermate controls were used to minimize variation between mouse strains. Mice were housed in individually ventilated cages at the Mount Sinai specific-pathogen-free facilities, provided food and water ad libitum, with conditions maintained at 21-23 °C, 39%-50% humidity and a 12:12 h dark-light cycle. All experiments were approved by, and in compliance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

## Human participants

Informed consent was obtained using the Universal Consent for Mount Sinai Biorepository (Human Subjects Electronic Research Applications 20-01197), in accordance with the protocol reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Participants provided written consent to analysis of their blood and resected tissue. Samples of tumour and non-involved lung were then obtained from surgical specimens of participants undergoing resection at the Mount Sinai Hospital in collaboration with the Thoracic Surgery Department, the Mount Sinai Biorepository and Department of Pathology. Analysis of the tumour and non-involved lung samples was performed under IRB Human Subjects Electronic Research Applications 10-00472A, in accordance with the protocol reviewed and approved by the IRB at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

## Murine tumour models

Unlabelled or GFP-transduced Kras LSL-G12D/+ ; Trp53 fl/fl (KP) and nonfluorescent Kras LSL-G12D/+ ;Trp53 fl/fl ; Rosa26 A3Bi ; Rag1 -/-(KPAR) cells derived from previously reported and validated mouse models of NSCLC 61,62 were used for tumour implantation models. KP lines were maintained at 37 °C in RPMI supplemented with 10% v/v fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% v/v penicillin-streptomycin (Pen-Strep). KPAR lines were maintained at 37 °C in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Pen-Strep. LLC1 carcinoma cells were a gift from L. Ferrari de Andrade at Mount Sinai, originally purchased from ATCC (CRL-1642). B16-F10 melanoma cells were purchased from ATCC (CRL-6475). These non-KP cells were maintained at 37 °C in DMEM with 10% FBS and 1% Pen-Strep. Cells were injected in vivo when in log-phase of growth and within three or four passages of thawing. Depending on the experiment, 500,000 KP cells, 150,000 KPAR cells, 500,000 B16-F10 or 500,000 LLC1 cells were injected intravenously through the tail vein. For survival studies, mice were killed when they exhibited more than 20% body weight loss or moribund status (laboured breathing, hunched posture, cachexia) according to predetermined humane end points. For profiling studies, mice were killed at the time points described in text. All experiments were approved and in compliance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

## Mixed-BM chimera

Lethally irradiated (2 × 6.5 Gy) 10-14-week-old CD45.1 mice were reconstituted with a 1:1 ratio of Nfe2l2 WT CD45.1 and Nfe2l2 ∆Ms4a3 CD45.2 BM cells (5 × 10 × 6 cells each) retro-orbitally. Mice were kept on sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim for 3 weeks. Mice were implanted with KP tumours 8-10 weeks after reconstitution, and chimerism was assessed 7 days before tumour implant (baseline), as well as 21 days post-implant (terminal).

## In vivo treatments

To deplete natural killer cells specifically in vivo, tumour-bearing mice were administered 200 μg of anti-NK1.1-depleting antibody (Bio X Cell Clone PK136, catalogue no. BE0036) or 200 μg of immunoglobulin G2a (IgG2a) isotype (Bio X Cell, catalogue no. BE0085) at the indicated time point and continued every other day. For depletion of monocytic-macrophages in vivo, tumour-bearing mice were administered 400 μg of anti-CSF1R-depleting antibody (Bio X Cell Clone AFS98, catalogue no. BE0213) or 400 μg of IgG2a isotype (Bio X Cell, catalogue no. BE0089) at the indicated time point and continued every other day. To assess pharmacological inhibition of the NRF2 pathway in vivo, tumour-bearing mice were given Brusatol (MedChemExpress, catalogue no. HY-19543) orally, dissolved in 5% dimethylsulfoxide and 95% corn oil. In some experiments, tumour-bearing mice were administered ML385 (MedChemExpress, catalogue no. HY-100523) orally, dissolved at a concentration of 8 mg ml -1 in 50% polyethylene glycol 30 + 50% saline. Mice were administered 100 μg of anti-PD-1 neutralizing antibody (Bio X Cell Clone RMP1-14, catalogue no. BE0146) or 100 μg of IgG2a isotype (Bio X Cell, catalogue no. BE0089) intravenously with 50 μg of Brusatol or 800 μg of ML385 every other day starting at day 10 after tumour implantation. Where indicated, mice were administered 500 mg kg -1 NAC (Sigma-Aldrich, catalogue no. A9165) daily intraperitoneally in saline.

## Mouse tissue processing

Mice were killed by CO 2 inhalation and death was confirmed by cervical dislocation. Mice were subjected to transcardiac perfusion with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and relevant tissue was extracted for downstream studies. Mouse lung lobes were digested on a shaker in RPMI media containing 10% FBS, collagenase IV (Sigma, catalogue no. C5138) and DNase I (Sigma, catalogue no. DN25) for 30 min at 37 °C before being triturated through an 18 G needle and filtered through a 70 μm mesh. Samples were subjected to RBC Lysis Buffer (BioLegend) for 2 min at room temperature and quenched with ice-cold fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer (PBS supplemented with 1% bovine serum albumin and 2 mM EDTA) before downstream processes. BM was flushed with cold FACS buffer using a 27 G needle from both long bones (femur and tibia) and filtered through a 70 μm mesh. Samples were subjected to RBC Lysis Buffer (BioLegend) for 2 min at room temperature and quenched with ice-cold FACS buffer before downstream processes. For assays such as low-input RNA and ATAC-seq, marrow cells were enriched for Kit + progenitors using the Mojosort Mouse Lin-neg enrichment kit (BioLegend, catalogue no. 480004). Blood was collected by cardiac puncture in EDTA-coated tubes and red blood cells (RBCs) were lysed in two successive cycles of 5 min each, at room temperature in RBC Lysis Buffer (BioLegend). Samples were quenched with FACS buffer and kept cold for downstream processes. Where relevant, serum was collected by coagulating blood in normal microcentrifuge tubes for 30 min at room temperature before centrifugation at 5,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. Serum aliquots were made and stored at -80C until experiment.

## Histology

Tumour-bearing lungs were analysed at the indicated time points as follows: the left lung lobe was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C, embedded in paraffin, and examined as 5-μm cross-sections. Following haematoxylin and eosin staining, lung tissue sections were scanned on slides at ×20 magnification using a Leica Aperio AT2 digital scanner and quantified by manual annotation of blinded slides using the Panoramic viewer and QuPath software v.0.4 (ref. 63).

## Ex vivo culture models

BMDMs were generated ex vivo using established protocols 34 . Briefly, BM was flushed using cold sterile PBS in sterile conditions (under laminar flow) and RBC-lysed for 1 min at room temperature. Cells were plated in DMEM containing 10% v/v FBS and 10 ng ml -1 recombinant macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF; Peprotech, catalogue no. 315-02). Cells were plated at a concentration of ~150,000 cells per cm 2 on non-treated Petri plates. At day 2, media was replenished 1:1 with fresh media containing 10 ng ml -1 M-CSF. At day 4, media was replaced with fresh media containing 10 ng ml -1 M-CSF. At day 6, cells were gently replated onto test plates using ice-cold PBS containing 5 mM EDTA. KP CM was added at 1:1 ratio with existing media at the indicated time point. On the basis of the experimental time point, at day 7 or 8, BMDMs (verified 90%-95% of culture condition based on F4/80 and CD11b expression) were gently lifted off plates using ice-cold PBS containing 10 mM EDTA and subjected to downstream processes (flow cytometry, sequencing). KP CM was obtained from sub-confluent tumour cells grown in DMEM containing 10% v/v FBS, spun down at 10,000 g to remove cellular debris and frozen in aliquots at -20 °C until use. Size-fractionation of CM was conducted using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter (Millipore) with a 3-kDa molecular weight cut-off. Protein-enriched supernatant and deproteinated flowthrough were resuspended to the same volume using base media and then frozen in aliquots at -20 °C until used. For experiments involving inhibitors of specific pathways, day 7 BMDMs were exposed to 10 μM ML385 (MedChemExpress, catalogue no. HY-100523) or 25 μM OB24 (MedChemExpress, catalogue no. HY-118487) at the indicated concentration and incubated for 18-24 h before wash off.

## Short-term culture system

Mouse HSCs and progenitors were enriched from total BM using the EasySep CD117 positive selection kit (StemCell) according to manufacturer's instructions and plated at a concentration of ~100,000 cells per cm 2 on non-treated Petri plates in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 10 ng ml -1 recombinant M-CSF (Peprotech). Cytokines (GM-CSF (Peprotech, catalogue no. 315-03), interleukin 6 (Peprotech, catalogue no. AF-216-16), G-CSF (Peprotech, catalogue no. AF-250-05), interleukin 3 (Peprotech, catalogue no. 213-13), stem cell factor (SCF) (Peprotech, catalogue no. 250-03) and Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (Peprotech, catalogue no. 250-31L)), or neutralizing antibodies (anti-GM-CSF (Bio X Cell clone MP1-22E9) and anti-interleukin 6 (Bio X Cell clone MP520F3)), were added to media with or without 1:1 KP CM at the initial time point in the indicated concentrations. Where applicable, SB203580 (MedChemExpress, catalogue no. HY-10256) or ML385 was also added to media at indicated concentrations.

## Methylcellulose and liquid culture assays

Total haematopoietic cells were extracted from the indicated mouse BM by flushing one femur with PBS, RBC-lysed and cells resuspended to a concentration of 300,000 cells per ml in IMDM (Cytivia) containing 1% Pen-Strep and 2% FBS. A volume of 0.4 ml of the resultant cells was added to pre-aliquoted 4 ml MethoCult tubes (StemCell, catalogue no. M3434 containing recombinant mouse SCF, recombinant mouse interleukin 3, recombinant mouse interleukin 6, recombinant human erythropoietin, recombinant human insulin and transferrin). The mixture was vortexed and dispensed onto 35-mm culture dishes in triplicate following the manufacturer's instructions. The dishes were incubated in a humidified incubator at 37 °C, 5% CO 2 . Colonies were counted manually on day 8 on a gridded scoring dish and averaged across four independent plates. Liquid cultures from indicated mouse BM were generated as follows: 500 myeloid progenitors were sorted in triplicate into a 96-well non-tissue-culture-coated plate (Greiner) containing 150 μl of IMDM media with 5% FBS, 1% Pen-Strep, 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol + cytokines (25 ng ml -1 each of recombinant mouse SCF, interleukin 11, Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand and recombinant human TPO, and 10 ng ml -1 each of interleukin 3, GM-CSF and recombinant human erythropoietin). Fresh media (160 μl) was replenished every 2 days, and cells were counted using a Countess on days 4, 6 and 8 post sort.

## Tissue processing (human)

Human NSCLC lung tissues were rinsed in cold PBS, minced and incubated on a shaker for 35 min at 37 °C in RPMI media containing collagenase IV at 0.25 mg ml -1 , Collagenase D at 200 U ml -1 and DNAse I at 0.1 mg ml -1 (Sigma). Cell suspensions were then quenched in ice-cold FACS buffer, triturated through a 18 G needle and filtered through a 70 μm mesh before RBC lysis for 2 min at room temperature. Cell suspensions were enriched for CD45 + cells by either bead selection (bound fraction from StemCell EasySep Human CD45 Depletion Kit II) per kit instructions or FACS sorting on a BD FACSAria or Beckman CytoFlex SRT sorter before processing for scRNA-seq, scATAC-seq or Multiome.

## RT-qPCR

Messenger RNA was extracted from fresh cell pellets using TRIzol LS (Life Technologies), and retrotranscribed to complementary DNA using the RNA to cDNA EcoDry Premix Double-Primed kit (Takara). Transcripts were quantified using the AB7900-FAST-384 system (Applied Biosystems) with a two-step RT-qPCR process. Primer sequences (5′ to 3′) are provided in Supplementary Table 6. Housekeeping gene Hprt mRNA was included in each plate to provide normalization reference. Quantification of relative gene expression was calculated by the comparative Ct method (2 -∆∆Ct ), relative to specified condition and normalized to values for Hprt .

## Flow cytometry and FACS

Mouse tissue. Single-cell suspensions from mouse lung, blood and BM were resuspended at the desired cellular concentration in ice-cold FACS buffer and subjected to immunostaining in the following ways. Cells were first incubated with Fixable Blue Live/Dead Dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and CD16/CD32 (clone 93, BioLegend) for 15 min on ice before surface staining. Cells were stained for surface markers for 25 min on ice (antibody details are listed in Supplementary Table 5). Subsequently, cells were acquired fresh on a BD LSR Fortessa analyser.

## Article

Alternatively, cells were fixed using the BD Cytofix kit (BD, catalogue no. 554655) following the manufacturer's instructions and acquired on a analyser within 3 days of fixation. For experiments assaying intracellular markers, cells were fixed using BD Cytofix/Cytoperm (BD, catalogue no. 554722) following the manufacturer's instructions and stained for intracellular antigens in Perm Buffer for 30 min at 4 °C. For phospho-flow cytometry of p38 MAPK, surface marker-stained cells were fixed at room temperature for 10 min in 4% paraformaldehyde and then further fixed in methanol at -80 °C for 1 h. Subsequently, cells were intracellularly stained in PBS containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.5% Triton X-100 for 1 h at room temperature. For cytokine staining, cells were first simulated in 10 μg ml -1 Brefeldin A, 0.2 μg ml -1 Ionomycin and 0.5 μg ml -1 phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4 h at 37 °C before intracellular staining. For experiments assaying intranuclear transcription factors, cells were fixed and permeabilized using Ebioscience FOXP3 kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalogue no. 00-5523-00) following the manufacturer's instructions and stained for intracellular antigens in Perm Buffer for 30 min at 4 °C (antibody details are listed in Supplementary Table 5). Subsequently, cells were acquired on a BD LSR Fortessa analyser within 3 days of fixation. For sequencing purposes, cells were stained as above and sorted on a BD FACSAria sorter or Beckman CytoFlex SRT sorter using DAPI or 7-aminoactinomycin D to exclude dead cells. Cells were sorted into pre-chilled FBS-coated microcentrifuge tubes in 200 μl of PBS containing 0.5% BSA. To assay ROS and lipid peroxidation stress, cells were stained with CellROX (Invitrogen, catalogue no. C10444) and LiperFluo (Dojindo, catalogue no. L248) according to the manufacturer's instructions. To assess mitochondrial function and membrane polarity, cells were similarly incubated with MitoSOX (Invitrogen, catalogue no. M36006) and tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (Invitrogen, catalogue no. T668) according to manufacturer's instructions and acquired live on BD LSR Fortessa analyser along with propidium iodide. For experiments analysing ferroptosis, cells were stained with annexin V for 15 min at room temperatire in 1x binding buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and fresh propidium iodide before acquisition live on the BD LSR Fortessa analyser. Representative gating strategies for broad sorting of myeloid lineage for sequencing experiments, and refined sorting for GMP transfer experiments are provided in Extended Data Fig. 2.

Human tissue. Cells were first incubated with Fixable Blue Live/Dead Dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and TruStain FcX (BioLegend) for 15 min on ice before surface staining. Cells were stained for surface markers for 25 min on ice (antibody details listed in Supplementary Table 5) followed by acquisition.

For sequencing studies, cells were sorted fresh on a BD FACSAria sorter or Beckman CytoFlex SRT sorter using DAPI or 7-aminoactinomycin D to exclude dead cells. Cells were sorted into pre-chilled FBS-coated microcentrifuge tubes in 200 μl of PBS containing 0.5% BSA. Representative gating strategies for sorting provided in Extended Data Fig. 2.

## Cytokine array and Olink proteomics

For collecting BM sera, four long bones of each mouse were flushed with the same 200 μl of PBS-2% FBS using a 0.3 ml insulin syringe with a 28 G needle and spun at 3,000 g for 5 min to remove BM cells. For collecting peripheral blood sera, collected blood from each mouse was allowed to coagulate at room temperature for 30 min, and then spun down at 3,000 g for 5 min to remove cells and debris. Supernatants were further clarified by spinning down at 12,000 g for 10 min, and samples were subsequently stored at -80 °C until use. BM sera samples were analysed using the semi-quantitative Proteome Profiler Mouse XL Cytokine Array (R&amp;D Systems) and relative chemiluminescence signal was calculated at three different exposures. Subsequently, samples were assayed using the Olink Target 48 mouse cytokine panel (Olink Bioscience, Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Real-time microfluidic quantitative PCR was performed in Biomark (Fluidigm) for the target protein quantification. Data were analysed using real-time PCR analysis software by means of the ∆∆ Ct method and Normalized Protein eXpression (NPX) manager. Data were normalized using internal controls in every single sample. NPX was generated on a log 2 scale proportional to the protein concentration. The protein concentration in standard concentration units (pg ml -1 ) is obtained by fitting the NPX value to a standard curve, using four parameters in a nonlinear logistic regression model. The standard curves are defined for each biomarker. Differential protein abundance based on adjusted NPX values was calculated using package OlinkAnalyze v.4.1.2.

## In vivo GMP transfer

The goal of short-term transfer experiments was to track fate of GMPs and study whether cell-intrinsic changes override microenvironmental influences upon infiltrating the TME. BM from indicated donor mice was flushed with cold FACS buffer using a 27 G needle from four long bones (femur and tibia) and filtered through a 70-μm mesh. Samples were subjected to RBC Lysis Buffer (BioLegend) for 2 min at room temperature and quenched with ice-cold FACS buffer before downstream processes. Marrow cells were enriched for Kit + progenitors using the Mojosort Mouse Lin-neg enrichment kit (BioLegend, catalogue no. 480004). GMPs were sorted into pre-chilled FBS-coated microcentrifuge tubes in 200 μl of PBS containing 0.5% BSA on the Beckman CytoFlex SRT sorter. Cells were spun down and resuspended to concentration of 200,000 cells per millilitre in ice-cold PBS. Recipient CD45.1 mice received 100 μl of GMP retro-orbitally under anaesthesia at the indicated time points. Recipient mice were subsequently killed at day 21 and subjected to flow cytometric analysis.

## Mouse CUT&amp;RUN

A low cell input CUT&amp;RUN technique was performed as follows: antibody-stained cell suspensions were lightly fixed in 200 μl of 0.1% formaldehyde (Sigma, catalogue no. 252549) at room temperature for 1 min and then quenched in 10 μl of 2.5 M glycine. Then 10,000 sorted cells in PBS were mixed with an equal volume of 2× Nuclear Extraction (NE) buffer: 40 mM HEPES, 20 mM KCl, 0.2% Triton X-100, 40% glycerol, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM Spermidine and 2× Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor (Millipore Sigma, catalogue no. 11873580001). Then 100× of KDAC inhibitor cocktail (100 μM trichostatin A, 50 mM sodium butyrate and 50 mM nicotinamide in 70% dimethylsulfoxide) was added to the sorted sample for a final concentration of 1× before cryopreservation at -80 °C. CUT&amp;RUN was performed in collaboration with EpiCypher following a modified CUT&amp;RUN protocol. In brief, samples were thawed and diluted to 1 × 10 5 cells ml -1 in 1× NE buffer. A mixture of 10 μl of activated Concanavalin A beads, 2 μl of 1:50 SNAP-CUTANA K-MetStat Panel and 0.5 μg of primary antibody (rabbit IgG (EpiCypher catalogue no., 13-0042; lot 20335004-04), H3K4me1 (Thermo Fisher, catalogue no. 701763; lot 2135869), H3K4me3 (EpiCypher, catalogue no. 13-0041; lot 210760004-01), H3K27me3 (Thermo Fisher, catalogue no. MA511198; lot VL3152691) and H3K27ac (CST, catalogue no. 8173S; lot 8)) was added to 1 × 10 4 cells per reaction and incubated overnight. Next day, beads were washed twice with 250 μl of digitonin buffer (20 mM, pH 7.5 HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM Spermidine, 1× Roche Complete mini, 0.01% digitonin) before adding 5 μl of CUTANA pAG-MNase in 50 μl of digitonin buffer per reaction. Beads were washed twice and suspended in 50 μl of digitonin buffer. Then 2 mM CaCl 2 was then added to activate MNase and 33 μl of high-salt stop buffer (750 mM NaCl, 26.4 mM EDTA, 5.28 mM EGTA, 66 μg ml -1 RNase A, 66 μg ml -1 glycogen) was added to stop the MNase activity after 2 h incubation at 4 °C. Twenty picograms of CUTANA Escherichia coli spike-in DNA was added per sample, followed by a 10-min incubation at 37 °C to release the cleaved chromatin. CUT&amp;RUN-enriched DNA was isolated by Concanavalin A beads, cleaned using Serapure beads, and libraries were prepared using a CUTANA CUT&amp;RUN Library Prep Kit (EpiCypher, catalogue no. 14-1001). Libraries were pooled and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 SP (150-cycle, paired end).

## scRNA-seq assay

For each sample, a target recovery of 8,000 cells was loaded onto each lane of a 10x Chromium chip according to manufacturer's instructions. Libraries were prepared according to the manufacturer's instructions. All libraries were quantified by means of an Agilent 2100 hsDNA Bioanalyzer and KAPA library quantification kit (Roche, catalogue no. 0797014001). Libraries were sequenced at a targeted depth of 25,000 reads per cell using the NovaSeq 6000 S2 100 cycle kit (Illumina).

## scATAC-seq and Multiome

For scATAC-seq preparation, cells were subjected to nuclei isolation following 10x Genomics manufacturer's protocol with minor adjustments. In case of low-input samples (with fewer than 100,000 cells), we used 0.2-ml PCR tubes and centrifuged at 4 °C using swinging rotor buckets to maximize nuclear recovery. For human NSCLC sample Multiome assays, cells were subjected to nuclei isolation following 10x Genomics manufacturer's protocol in the presence of RNAse inhibitor (Sigma) and dithiothreitol (Sigma) to prevent RNA degradation. Viability of these nuclei was assessed using acridine orange-propidium iodide viability staining reagent (Nexcelom), and all samples post-nuclei isolation demonstrated viability at or below 1%. A target recovery number of 8,000 to 10,000 nuclei was loaded onto each lane of a 10x Chromium chip according to manufacturer's instructions. Barcoded DNA was extracted from the GEMs post-cleanup and amplified with 10x-specific sample indexing following the manufacturer's protocols. Libraries were quantified using TapeStation (Agilent) and were sequenced in pair-end mode using the NovaSeq 6000 S2 100 cycle kit (Illumina) targeting a depth of 25,000 reads per cell.

## Mouse scRNA-seq analysis

Gene expression reads were aligned to the mm10 reference transcriptome and count matrices were generated using the default CellRanger 2.1 workflow, using 'raw' matrix output. Following alignment, barcodes matching cells that contained more than 500 unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) were extracted. From these cells, those with transcripts of more than 25% mitochondrial genes (quality control thresholds min\_mc\_size = 25, max\_f\_mit = 0.1) were filtered from downstream analyses. Matrix scaling, logarithmic normalization and batch correction by means of data alignment through canonical correlation analysis, and unsupervised clustering (resolution 0.7) using a K-nn graph partitioning approach were performed as previously described. Initial marker genes per cluster were identified using the FindMarkers function in Seurat v.4.4.0 (ref. 64) (non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test using presto and default parameters). Alternatively, we used the metacell package for clustering cells across the tumour, blood and BM samples separately (metacell size K = 25, outlier filter T\_lfc = 3). Subsequently clusters were annotated in a semi-supervised manner using canonical markers for lineage (for example, T cell, B cell, myeloid cell) and myeloid identity clusters were subjected to gene-module analyses as follows: cells were uniformly downsampled to 2,000 UMI to avoid counts-based bias before selecting the set of variable genes. Subsequently, the gene-gene correlation matrix was computed for each sample 65 subsetting for myeloid cells. Correlation matrices were averaged using Fisher Z -transformation. The inverse transformation resulted in the best-estimate correlation coefficients of gene-gene interactions across the dataset. Genes were clustered into modules using complete linkage hierarchical clustering over this correlation distance. Finally, myeloid clusters were annotated using lineage or function-determining gene modules. Where indicated, gene set enrichment analysis was performed (EnrichR) and redundancy-collapsed results were illustrated (REVIGO). Single-cell gene signature scoring was conducted using UCell v.2.4 (ref. 66); gene signatures are curated from previously published studies 9,67,68 and provided in Supplementary Table 1. Differentially expressed genes were calculated on pseudobulk counts data using muscat 69 (pbDD aggregateData) and defined as adjusted local P &lt; 0.05 and absolute log 2 [fold change] ≥ 1. Analyses were mostly run using mac x86 64-bit platform running R v.4.3.1 on macOS Big Sur 11.3.1 or mac x86 64-bit platform running R v.4.2.2 on Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS.

## Mouse scATAC-seq analysis

Fastq files from scATAC-seq samples were aligned to mouse genome reference mm10 using cellranger-atac v.2.0.0. Fragment files were parsed with ArchR v.1.0.2 and initial quality control was applied on the basis of sequencing depth and quality (minTSS = 8, minFrags = 5,000). Dimensionality reduction was applied on cells passing filters using standard ArchR workflow 70 (resolution 0.2, 0.4 and 0.8, varFeatures 15,000). Cells were clustered using Seurat's FindClusters function (resolution 0.8). Peaks were called using Macs2 (ref. 71) (adjusted P value &lt; 0.05) to generate group coverages using addReproduciblePeakSet with default parameters. To select for myeloid clusters, we relied on ArchR Gene Scores or gene-activity scores (a surrogate for gene expression based on accessibility at the gene loci) of canonical markers and de novo marker discovery using getMarkerFeatures and getMarkers on the GeneScoreMatrix assay (FDR ≤ 0.01 and log 2 [fold change] ≥ 1.25). Genomic regions were confirmed by visual inspection on Interactive Genomics Viewer (IGV). We filtered out lymphoid cell populations and CD45-negative contaminants, repeating ArchR analysis workflow on subsetted cells to increase the resolution of the monocytic and macrophage compartment (resolution 2.0). We used addGeneIntegrationMatrix with constraints to map between the paired scRNA and scATAC data. Correlation between gene scores in scATAC-seq clusters and relative gene expression in scRNA-seq clusters was used to define similarity scores and soft-label annotations to scATAC-seq clusters in a semi-supervised manner. TF deviations per cluster were inferred following ChromVAR 72 using JAPSAR2020 motifs, CISBP and HOMER motifs. We calculated differentially accessible marker peak sets for identified monocytic-macrophage clusters and predicted which TFs mediate binding and define accessibility at these marker peaks using ArchR. Such analysis yields key lineage-determining TFs important for cell identity but can also prioritize TFs that are crucial to that cell's state and function. As part of candidate TF nomination, we computed TFs whose gene expression was positively correlated with changes in accessibility of their binding motifs (correlation greater than 0.4) and ranked by TF deviation ( ∆ ) across clusters to nominate candidate regulators likely to be important to cellular function and identity. DARs were calculated using getMarkerFeatures on the Peak Matrix assay, with significance defined on the Wilcoxon rank sum test as adjusted local P &lt; 0.05 and absolute log 2 [fold change] ≥ 0.4. To identify differentially accessible TF motifs across conditions, we used getMarkerFeatures on the MotifMatrix assay correcting for TSS enrichment and number of fragments (FDR ≤ 0.05). Analyses were run using mac x86 64-bit platform running R v.4.3.1 on macOS Big Sur 11.3.1.

For paired analyses of RNA and ATAC features, previously processed and annotated mouse BM, blood and tumour scRNA-seq Seurat objects were normalized and scaled again using SCTransform (glmGamPoi, vars.to.regress = 'percent.mt', variable.features.n = 8,000). Mouse BM, blood and tumour scATAC-seq data were processed in parallel as follows. ATAC CellRanger fragment files were transformed into ArrowFiles with the ArchR package using the above methodology. Peaks were called using Macs2 with default parameters and addGroupCoverages, addReproduciblePeakSet and addPeakMatrix functions. Peaks co-accessibility matrix was obtained using the addCoAccessibility function. To pair each scRNA-seq cell with a scATAC-seq cell, datasets from both modalities were split by tissue before running FindTransferAnchors and TransferData using ATAC cells as the reference and RNA cells as the query. The combined Seurat object was filtered on myeloid cells (scRNA-seq metadata) and previously obtained peak matrix was also subsetted before being incorporated. TF deviations was inferred following ChromVAR using JAPSAR2020 and CISBP motifs.

## Mouse CUT&amp;RUN analysis

FASTQ data were adaptor trimmed using Trim Galore v.0.6.6 and aligned to mm10 reference genome using bowtie2 v.2.3.4.3 with parameters -X 700 -I 10. Uniquely mapped, non-duplicated reads with mapping quality more than 30 were filtered using SAMToolsview and Picard MarkDuplicates. BEDTools intersect was used to remove regions from ENCODE blacklist. Genome coverage tracks were generated using deeptools2 with parameters bamCoverage --binSize 10 -normalizeUsing CPM --extendReads --ignoreDuplicates --smoothLength 50. Peaks were called using SEACR with parameters 'norm' and 'relaxed'. Paired binary alignment map files were generated for each sample after filtering for reads with a mapping quality score of more than 30 and a sequence length of less than 150. Bigwig files were derived from fragment files by normalizing read counts, and tracks were visualized using IGV v.2.17.4. We retrieved a list of myeloid genomic positions associated with open chromatin from the Immunological Genome Project murine ATAC-seq atlas 73 to prioritize active or poised states, and subsetted the regions to those retained in the published analysis. We extended the summits ±500 base pairs to form a list of OCRs and trimmed the regions to within chromosomal boundaries using GenomicRanges v.1.52.0. These OCRs were then used to derive counts matrices, defined by the number of observed reads in each region, using chromVAR v.1.22 (ref. 72). Counts were then merged per histone mark, empty regions were filtered and GC bias was calculated per region. Using motifmatchr v.1.20.0, regions were annotated for the presence of TF motifs by referencing a custom database of mouse position frequency matrices. Subsequent chromVAR deviation z -scores indicate the bias-corrected and normalized presence of each histone modification around a particular TF motif, across all OCRs. To identify differentially variable regions with only two or three samples in each condition, we stratified data on the basis of the mean difference between two conditions, and the fraction of intrasample variance over total variance. The top genomic regions from chromVAR CUT&amp;RUN analysis were confirmed by visual inspection on IGV and plotted using pyGenomeTracks v.3.9. To unbiasedly identify OCRs that were retained in both tumour-associated BM GMPs and Ly6C hi monocytes, we applied k -means clustering to chromVAR-corrected OCR scores and used Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool v.4.0.4 (ref. 74) (basal plus extension association rule) to annotate and summarize clusters of interest into Gene Ontology terms. To visualize the underlying distribution of histone modification signal without chromVAR correction, we used Deeptools v.3.5.5 to generate averaged profiles and heatmaps for each cluster of interest. In brief, bigwigs for each cell type and condition were averaged using bigwigAverage, browser extensible data files were outputted containing regions from each cluster, score matrices were calculated by computeMatrix and plots were generated through plotHeatmap. To orthogonally pinpoint tumour-specific changes in histone signal, scores were calculated for desired histone marks and cell types using the previously established DORC framework 75,76 . DORC scores integrated paired bulk RNA-seq 77 and CUT&amp;RUN signal (https://rstats.immgen.org/cutrun/index.html) in OCRs from sorted immune populations, identifying genomic regions which covary with gene expression.

## Human public dataset scRNA-seq analysis

Raw count matrices were obtained from GEO repositories of published studies 37,78,79 , also listed in Supplementary Table 7. After removal of doublets using the Solo method, data was processed in Scanpy 80 , with genes detected in fewer than 10 cells and cells expressing fewer than 200 genes being filtered out. Further pre-processing involved filtering to remove cells where: (1) log1p\_total\_counts, log1p\_n\_genes\_by\_counts or the top 20 gene fraction exceeded five median absolute deviations;

and (2) mitochondrial\_counts percentage surpassed three median absolute deviations or more than 20. The subsequent data was normalized, log1p-transformed and integrated using scVI 81 . The latent representation was used to compute the nearest neighbours distance matrix used for Leiden clustering at resolution 1. Cell types were manually annotated using established single-cell atlases. We analysed differential expression using Wilcoxon rank sum test, and corrected P values with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Single-cell gene signature scoring was performed using sc.tl.score\_genes function in Scanpy. Gene set enrichment analysis was conducted using Gseapy with the ENCODE\_ and\_ChEA\_Consensus\_TFs\_from\_ChIP-X gene set.

## Human scATAC-seq and Multiome analysis

Fastq files from scATAC-seq and Multiome samples were aligned to human genome reference hg38 using cellranger-atac v.2.0.0 or cellranger-arc v.2.0.0 respectively. Fragment files were parsed with ArchR v.1.0.2 and initial quality control was applied on the basis of sequencing depth and quality, discarding cells with less than 3,000 fragments or a transcription start site enrichment score of less than 8. Dimensionality reduction and clustering was applied on cells passing filters using ArchR. To select for myeloid clusters, we relied on ArchR Gene Scores of canonical markers and de novo marker discovery using getMarkerFeatures on the GeneScoreMatrix assay. Thus, we filtered out lymphoid cell populations and CD45-negative contaminants for downstream RNA-ATAC integration. snRNA-seq from Multiome samples was analysed using Seurat v.4.4.0. Cells with fewer than 800 UMI or fewer than 400 genes detected were filtered out followed by default functions for data normalization and dimensionality reduction. To aid in the identification of macrophages cell states, we used hdWGCNA v.0.2.18. This method allows for identification of gene co-expression modules after generation of metacells (groups of neighbouring cells in embedding space) to circumvent data sparsity. Metacells were generated with MetacellsByGroups function with following parameters: k = 20 max\_ shared = 15 and min\_cells = 20. Gene modules were discovered using the function ConstructNetwork with the following parameters: softpower = 3, deepSplit = 1, minModuleSize = 10, mergeCutHeight = 0.2, maxblocksize = 35,658. We also verified monocyte and macrophage assignment using orthogonal methodology of consensus non-negative matrix factorization ( k = 55). For each cluster, we annotated using top genes ranked by spectra score in the gene expression program matrix obtained and selected the top 50 genes to generate cellular expression program signatures. In addition to soft assignments, this non-negative matrix factorization-based approach can work around the challenges of identifying and correcting batch effects emerged during data integration and requires minimal pre-processing steps. To annotate macrophage subtypes in chromatin space, we first co-embedded all scATAC samples and Multiome samples together, and removed batch effects using harmony v.0.1.1. We then annotated each cell cluster by the most abundant macrophage state in Multiome-origin cells that passed quality control and were previously annotated in snRNA-seq using marker gene expression. TF activity was calculated using ChromVAR v.1.16 implemented by ArchR by means of addMotifAnnotations, addBgdPeaks and addDeviationsMatrix functions. For visualization, ArchR built-in plotting functions and ComplexHeatmap v.2.10 were used. Subsequently, we carried out similar downstream gene activation score calculation using UCell, TF motif enrichment, TF prioritization and peak2gene linkage analyses as described above in the mouse section.

remove doublets and batch effects, respectively, with default settings. Leiden clustering was performed on harmony-corrected PCA embeddings (resolution of 2.0). Peripheral blood cell types were carefully annotated using existing single-cell PBMC and HSPC atlases. As previously, RNA gene signature scoring was calculated using UCell v.2.4. ATAC-seq data were further processed with pycisTopic v.2.0a0 (ref. 82) to export pseudobulk fragments files based on RNA cell-type annotations, call peaks (shift = 73, ext\_size = 146, q\_value = 0.05), generate a consensus peak set (peak\_half\_width = 250), run cisTopic using collapsed Gibbs sampling (n\_topics = 40) and visualize topic contributions to identify topics enriched in PBMCs from patients with NSCLC. Pathway analyses was conducted on selected topics (regions) using Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool as previously described.

## Quantification and statistical analysis

No statistical methods were used a priori to determine sample size. Sample size was based on power analyses from prior studies in the laboratory and on establishing reproducibility between experiments. For flow cytometry, data were collected on FACSDiva v.8 or Beckman CytoExpert, and analysed using FlowJo v.10.9. Absolute cell numbers were calculated using initial loading volume and fluorescent beads (Accucheck Counting Beads PCB100, Molecular Probes) following the manufacturer's instructions. Where applicable, MFI measurements were compared for markers of interest. For histology, scanned haematoxylin and eosin slides were quantified by manual annotation of investigator-blinded slides using QuPath v.0.4 (ref. 63).

Statistical analyses for flow cytometry and histology were done using Prism v.10.0 (GraphPad). Statistical ranges in figures represent individual data points with bar at mean value, unless otherwise indicated in box plots or violin plots. For continuous data satisfying normality assumptions (flow cytometry, histology and sequencing), statistical significance between conditions was determined using unpaired Student's t -test for independent comparisons (Holm-Sidak) or one-way ANOVA for three or more independent groups, with multiple comparison correction (Dunnett's or Tukey's). Statistical significance between grouped data across three or more conditions was determined using two-way ANOVA with multiple comparison correction (Sidak's). Statistical significance for mouse survival analyses was performed using Kaplan-Meier log-rank estimate. UCell scores calculated on single-cell feature data are based on the Mann-Whitney U statistic and robust to dataset size and sample heterogeneity. DEG analyses in single-cell feature data were subjected to Wilcoxon rank sum test on pseudobulk values, as well as 'bimod' likelihood-ratio test optimal for single-cell feature expression 83 where indicated. Ontology terms in EnrichR were ranked by P value or odds ratio as indicated; where the enrichment P value was calculated using Fisher's exact test comparing the observed frequency with the frequency expected by chance in background gene list. Throughout the paper: * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.01, *** P &lt; 0.001 and 'NS' indicates not significant.

The following notable R were packages used: BiocManager v.1.30.22; biomaRt v.2.56.1; BSgenome v.1.68.0; BSgenome.Mmusculus.UCSC. mm10 sequences; BSgenome.Hsapiens.UCSC.hg38 sequences; Seurat v.4.4.0 and v.4.9.9; harmony v.0.1.1; scDissector v.1.0.0; parallel v.4.3.1; ShinyTree v.0.2.7; data.table v.1.14.8; reshape2 v.1.4.4; reticulate v.1.32.0; heatmaply v.1.3.0; pheatmap v.1.0.12; plotly v.4.10.0; ggvis v.0.4.7; ggplot2 v.3.3.5; cowplot v.1.1.1; patchwork v.1.1.3; dplyr v.1.3.1; tidyr v.1.3.0; tidyverse v.2.0.0; plyranges v.1.20.0; Matrix v.0.9.8; seriation v.1.3.5; ArchR v.1.0.2; chromVAR v.1.22.1; Signac v.1.11.9; complexHeatmap v.2.16.0; hdWGCNA v.0.2.18; edgeR v.3.42.4; limma v.3.56.2; presto v.1.0.0; EnhancedVolcano v.1.18.0; GenomeInfoDb v.1.36.1; GenomicRanges v.1.52.0; motifmatchr v.1.20.0, deeptools v.3.5.5, MAST v.1.6; Nebulosa v.1.10.0; RColorBrewer v.1.1; scCustomize v.1.1.3; sceasy v.0.0.7; scTools v.1.0; SeuratDisk v.0.0.0.9; SeuratWrappers v.0.3.19; SignatuR v.0.1.1; SingleCellExperiment v.1.22.0; TFBSTools v.1.38.0; UCell v.2.4.0, muscat v.1.20.0, OlinkAnalyze v.4.1.2.

## Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

## Data availability

Accession numbers for re-analysed published datasets are listed in Supplementary Table 7. Processed matrix files and metadata for the mouse tissue scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq generated in this study are made publicly available on GEO (GSE270148). Processed matrix files and metadata for human tissue scATAC-seq and 10x Multiome data generated in this study are also made publicly available at the time of publication on GEO (GSE270148). Source data are provided with this paper.

## Code availability

Notable software package versions are listed in the Methods and in Supplementary Table 7. No new pipelines were used in the study beyond those described in the relevant Methods sections. Exemplar data objects and code for notable analyses in this study are provided at github.com/Merad-Lab/Hegde\_Myelopoiesis\_Epigenetics. Any additional information required to interpret data reported in this paper is available from the corresponding author upon request.

## Article

Acknowledgements M.M. was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants CA257195, CA254104 and CA154947. S.H. was supported by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) fellowship K00CA223043. B.Y.S. was supported by NIH Medical Scientist Training grant T32GM146636. R.M. was supported by the AACR-AstraZeneca Immuno-oncology fellowship 21-40-12-MATT. This work was supported by grant no. R24-072073 to the Immunological Genome Project (ImmGen) consortium. We thank the patients and their families for participating in the clinical study; members of the Merad laboratory and Brown laboratory at the Marc and Jennifer Lipschultz Precision Immunology Institute at Mount Sinai for insightful discussions and feedback; and E. Bernstein, D. Hasson and D. Filipescu for their technical advice and feedback. We acknowledge the Human Immune Monitoring Center, the Mount Sinai Biorepository and Pathology Core and the Mount Sinai Cytometry Core for extensive support and resources. This work was supported in part through the computational resources and staff expertise provided by the Bioinformatics for Next Generation Sequencing (BiNGS) Shared Resource Facility funded by NCI P30 Cancer Center and NIH/NIAMS P30 Skin Biology Disease Resource-based Center support grants. This work was also supported in part through the computational and data resources and staff expertise provided by Scientific Computing and Data at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and supported by the Clinical and Translational Science Awards (CTSA) grant UL1TR004419, and the Office of Research Infrastructure award S10OD026880 and S10OD030463. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.

Author contributions Conceptualization: S.H. and M.M. Methodology: S.H., B.G., S.M., J.D.B., A.M.T., B.D.B. and M.M. Acquisition and analysis of data: S.H., J.L.B., R.M., M.D.P., A. Marks, M.B, P.H., T .C., K.N., L. T ., K.A. and G.C. Computational investigation of data: S.H., B.G., B. Y .S., L.H.,

M.M.S., B.K., M.D.P., A. Magen, D.D., K.F., J.J.L., D.A. and M.J.B. Writing-original draft: S.H. Writing-review and editing: S.H. and M.M. Resources: S.K.-S., R.M.F., A.J.K., F.G., J.D.B., S.Z.J., T.U.M., B.D.B. and M.M. Funding and supervision: M.M.

Competing interests M.M. serves on the scientific advisory board and holds stock from Compugen Inc., Dynavax Inc., Innate Pharma Inc., Morphic Therapeutics, Asher Bio Inc., Dren Bio Inc., Nirogy Inc., Genenta Inc., Oncoresponse, Inc. and Owkin Inc. M.M. also serves on the ad hoc scientific advisory board of DBV Technologies Inc. and Genentech Inc., and on the foundation advisory board of Breakthrough Cancer. M.M. receives funding for contracted research from Genentech, Regeneron and Boehringer Ingelheim. T.U.M. has served on advisory and/or data safety monitoring boards for Rockefeller University, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Abbvie, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Atara, AstraZeneca, Genentech, Celldex, Chimeric, Glenmark, Simcere, Surface, G1 Therapeutics, NGMbio, DBV Technologies, Arcus and Astellas, and receives contracted grants from Regeneron, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck and Boehringer Ingelheim. The above interests are not directly relevant to this manuscript. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

## Additional information

Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09493-y.

## Article

Extended Data Fig. 1 | Lung cancer promotes changes in the chromatin state of BM myeloid progenitors. a , Averaged heatmap for abundance of LT-HSCs, progenitors, and mature populations in bone marrow (BM) of KP tumor-bearing mice at different timepoints, normalized to tumor-naïve mice (left to right, n = 10,7,12,12). Pooled from two independent experiments. b , Granulocytic-monocytic colony forming units (CFU-GM) relative to erythroid blasts (BFU-E) after 8 days of incubation. n = 4 replicates. Pooled from two independent experiments. c , Longitudinal expansion of sorted GMPs from naïve and KP tumor-bearing mice. n = 3 replicates from one experiment. d , Number of Ly6C hi monocytes and Ly6G hi neutrophils in blood of naïve and KP tumor-bearing mice at different time points, correlated with tumor burden. Data are individual data points with confidence intervals for linear regression (left to right, n = 5,7,12,12). Pooled from two independent experiments. e , Number of GMPs, cMoPs, and CD157 + Ly6C hi monocytes in BM, and number of Ly6C hi monocytes in blood of KP GEMM at 12 weeks post tumor initiation, compared to tumor-free mice. n = 3 mice per group, representative of two independent experiments. f , scRNA-seq heatmap of per-cell UMI counts across indicated myeloid cell subclusters in BM of tumor-bearing and naïve mice. Pooled over n = 3 mice per group. g , Gene ontology (GO) terms enriched in KP tumor-bearing mouse GMPs (left) and cMoPs (right) compared to naïve counterparts. Curated terms arranged by adjusted p-value (log q-value). h , Gene ontology (GO) terms enriched in PyMT tumor-bearing mouse GMPs compared to naïve counterparts from Gerber-Ferder et al. 13 (left) and Hao et al. 2023 (right). Curated terms arranged by adjusted p-value (log q-value).

i , exemplar scATAC-seq UMAP and heatmap of column-normalized gene scores across indicated myeloid cell subclusters in BM of tumor-bearing and naïve mice. Pooled over n = 3 mice per group. j , scATAC-seq heatmap of normalized transcription factor (TF) motif accessibility enrichment in marker peak regions of indicated myeloid cell states. Pooled from n = 3 mice per group. k , GREAT pathway terms enriched in indicated H3K4me3 regions from BM GMPs and Ly6C hi monocytes of KP tumor-bearing mice (Fig. 1f). Curated terms arranged by adjusted p-value (q-value). l-m , H3K4me1, H3K27ac, and H3K27me3 CUT&amp;RUN signal clustering (l) and relative DORC scores for exemplar genes (m) in KP tumor-associated GMP relative to naïve GMP. n , Mean difference of ChromVAR-scores for TFs enriched in tumor-associated H3K4me3 signal versus H3K4me1 (left) and H3K27ac (right). o , scRNA-seq per-cell gene expression heatmap scaled across indicated myeloid subclusters in peripheral blood of human patients with NSCLC. Pooled from n = 4 patients. p , GREAT pathway terms enriched in indicated differentially accessible cisTopic region #5 of CD14 + monocytes from blood of patients with NSCLC (Fig. 1j). q , ChIP-X Enrichment Analysis (ChEA) calculated TF regulators for differentially expressed genes in CD14 + monocytes from blood of patients with NSCLC (n = 3) compared to healthy donors (n = 2). Dot color indicate major known biological pathways. Statistics computed by two-tailed Welch's t-test (b) , unpaired t-test with Holm-Sidak multiple comparison (c) , unpaired two-tailed Student's t-test (e) , hypergeometric test with multiple test correction (g,h,k,j,p,q) . error bars represent mean +/- SEM (c) , colorscale indicates significance of motif enrichment based on hypergeometric test (j) .

## Article

tumor-bearing and naïve (n = 4) Mx1 GFP mice. d , Frequency of GFP + cells within CD64 + MERTK + mo-macs of indicated phenotype in tumor-bearing Mx1 GFP mice, n = 4 per group. e , Browser plots at indicated gene loci for H3K27ac signal in KP tumor-associated and naïve GMPs. Highlighted regions indicate differential signal near known cis-regulatory elements and open chromatin (OCR) containing Nfe2l2 motif. Unless noted, data shown as individual data points with bar denoting mean, representative of two independent experiments (a,c,d) . Statistics computed by unpaired two-tailed Student's t-test (a,d) , and unpaired t-test with Holm-Sidak multiple comparison (c) .

## Article

μ μ

μ